

The data that were reported by the Israeli Ministry of Health has limitations and biases. For instance, symptom reporting was more comprehensive among those who tested positive for COVID-19, and validated with a directed epidemiological effort13. Thus, mislabeling of symptoms among those who tested negative for COVID-19 is expected. This is reflected in the proportion of persons who were COVID-19 positive from the total number of individuals who were positive for each symptom. Accordingly, we identified features with biased reporting (headache 96.2%, sore throat 92.3% and shortness of breath 92.4%) and symptoms with balanced reporting (cough 27.4% and fever 45.9%). Mislabeling of symptoms may also arise from an underestimation and underreporting of symptoms among persons who tested negative. The unique pathogenesis mechanisms of SARS-Cov-2, and the related spectrum of symptoms are the subject of many ongoing studies. The model we built provides initial COVID-19 test screening based on simple clinical signs and symptoms. Improving clinical priorities may lower the burden currently faced by health systems18, by facilitating optimized management of healthcare resources during future waves of the SARS-Cov-2 pandemic. This is especially important in developing countries with limited resources.

This research is not without shortcomings. We relied on the data reported by the Israeli Ministry of Health, which has limitations, biases and missing information regarding some of the features. For example, for patients labeled as having had contact with a person confirmed to have COVID-19, additional information such as the duration and location (indoors/outdoors) of the contact was not available. Some symptoms (such as lack of smell and taste) were identified as being very predictive of a COVID-19 infection by previous studies19, but were not recorded by the Israeli Ministry of Health. We showed that training and testing a model while filtering out symptoms of high bias in advance still achieved very high accuracy. We also note that all the symptoms were self-reported, and a negative value for a symptom might mean that the symptom was not reported. It is therefore important to assess the model’s performance in the circumstance that more values are unreported or missing rather than with negative values. To simulate a less biased condition, in our prospective test set, we randomly selected negative reports of all five symptoms at a time, and removed the negative values. When applied to these simulated test sets, the model still showed promising results (Fig. 4), thus reinforcing our confidence in the model.

While differences in reporting symptoms is a possible limitation of our model, all the persons tested (except for a small minority who were tested under surveys of healthcare workers) had indications for testing13. This implies that there was no referral bias for the vast majority of the subjects in this dataset. The main symptoms in the Israeli Ministry of Health guidelines were cough and fever, and we believe that these symptoms are hard to miss even in those who were negative to SARS-Cov-2. Moreover, we assume that the relatively large sample size helped overcome biases related to the COVID-19-negative group.

We highlight the need for more robust data to complement our framework, while also acknowledging that self-reporting of symptoms is always subject to bias. As the COVID-19 pandemic progresses, ongoing recording and sharing of robust data between public organizations and the scientific community are crucial. In parallel to increasing understanding of the contribution of various symptoms to diagnosing the disease, additional symptoms might be integrated into future models.

In conclusion, based on nationwide data reported by the Israeli Ministry of Health, we developed a model for predicting COVID-19 diagnosis by asking eight basic questions. Our framework can be used, among other considerations, to prioritize testing for COVID-19 when testing resources are limited. In addition, the methodology presented in this study may benefit the health system response to future epidemic waves of this disease and of other respiratory viruses in general.